JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
Dramatic cell phone
video taken by the wife of the
victim in this
week's deadly encounter with
Charlotte police
raises even more questions.
And it's Friday.
Mark Shields and David Brooks
take on this
week in politics, as we also
examine a Hillary
Clinton presidency in the second
part of our
series on how the candidates
would actually
govern.
Then: Two years after the death
of Michael
Brown at the hands of police in
Ferguson,
Missouri, the community turns to
a classic
Greek tragedy for a way to
address ongoing
issues.
BRYAN DOERRIES, Co-Founder,
Outside the Wire:
The central question of this
play, "Antigone,"
is, what happens when everyone's
right or
feels justified in what they're
doing?
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: For the first
time, the public
is getting a look at the police
shooting that
rocked Charlotte, North
Carolina.
Keith Scott was killed Monday,
and it turns
out his wife recorded his last
moments.
Be advised: The video may be
disturbing to
some.
RAKEYIA SCOTT, Wife of Keith
Lamont Scott:
Don't shoot him.
He has no weapon.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The voice of
Rakeyia Scott,
pleading with Charlotte police,
telling them
her husband is unarmed and has a
brain injury,
as the confrontation quickly
escalates.
MAN: Drop the gun!
Drop the gun!
RAKEYIA SCOTT: He doesn't have a
gun.
He has a TBI.
MAN: Drop the gun.
RAKEYIA SCOTT: He is not going
to do anything
to you guys.
He just took his medicine.
Keith, don't let them break the
windows.
Come on out the car.
MAN: Drop the gun!
RAKEYIA SCOTT: Keith, don't do
it.
MAN: Drop the gun!
RAKEYIA SCOTT: Get out the car.
Keith!
Don't you do it!
MAN: Drop the gun.
RAKEYIA SCOTT: Keith!
Keith!
Don't you do it!
(GUNSHOTS)
RAKEYIA SCOTT: Did you shoot
him?
Did you shoot him?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Keith Scott is
now lying on
the ground, as his wife screams.
RAKEYIA SCOTT: Did you shoot
him?
He better not be (EXPLETIVE
DELETED) dead.
PROTESTERS: Release the video!
Release the video!
JUDY WOODRUFF: All of this as
city officials
face mounting pressure to
release police body
camera and dash cam video.
KERR PUTNEY,
Charlotte-Mecklenburg, North
Carolina, Police Chief: One
piece of evidence
will never, ever make a good
case.
I know the expectation that
video footage
can be the panacea, and I can
tell you that
is not quite the case.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The city's mayor
said today
the police video should be
released, but only
when it won't jeopardize the
investigation.
Scott's family has now seen the
police footage,
and is calling for its public
release.
And protesters kept up that call
last night.
MAN: If you want people to not
come out here,
and protest, and not to be
suspicious or second-guess
what's going on with the
politicians and the
police, you need to have
transparency.
People need to -- people need to
know the
truth.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thursday's
demonstrations were
largely peaceful, as the city
imposed a midnight
curfew, and National Guard
troops helped patrol
the streets.
Meanwhile, police say they
arrested a suspect
in the fatal shooting of a
protester, Justin
Carr, on Wednesday night.
They gave no other details.
For more on that new video and
the ongoing
investigation, we turn to
Yamiche Alcindor,
who is covering the events in
Charlotte for
The New York Times.
I spoke to her a short time ago.
Yamiche Alcindor, thank you very
much for
talking with us.
We just showed that video.
You were one of the reporters
the family gave
this to.
Where was Mr. Scott's wife when
she took this?
YAMICHE ALCINDOR, The New York
Times: Mr.
Scott's wife was nearby his car.
She was in the complex where
they lived together.
They have been married about 20
years.
But she, from my understanding,
what the lawyers
told me, she had seen her
husband sitting
in the car.
He flashed his cell phone at her
indicating
that he wanted -- that he his
phone was dying
and that he wanted a charger.
She then went inside to go get
that cell phone
charger.
She was inside only for a couple
of minutes,
and then she came out.
And when she came out, she saw
the scene unfolding
and, as the scene was unfolding,
she started
to record her video, to record
the video on
her phone.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it is very
difficult to
watch, as we just showed our
audience.
What's been the reaction?
Has there been any official
reaction since
this has been out?
YAMICHE ALCINDOR: From my
understanding, we
have asked for several hours now
for a reaction
from the city, and we have not,
as of this
hour, gotten any reaction from
the city about
this video.
I should say the police chief
has said that
the dash cam video, which is a
different video
than the video that was released
today, but
that that video doesn't really
answer all
the questions and it's not
definitive what
happened.
So, they have at least talked a
little bit
about what the video, all the
videos that
captured the shooting show.
So, in that regard, they have
done that.
But they have not at all
responded specifically
to the video released today by
the family
of Keith Scott.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What questions,
Yamiche, does
this video answer?
I know there are some blurry
objects on the
ground near where Mr. Scott's
body is lying.
Is there any consensus on
whether there was
a gun?
YAMICHE ALCINDOR: The family has
said -- has
told us through their attorneys
that Mr. Scott
didn't own a gun.
I was told by the attorneys
today that the
wife often cleaned that vehicle
and that there
was not a -- she never saw a gun
and that
he didn't own a gun.
However, the police, of course,
have been
very clear.
They say that he did have a gun,
that they
had found a gun -- that they had
found a gun
on him after the shooting.
They're not exactly sure where
that gun was
found.
However, they are saying that
there was a
gun on the scene.
In terms of what this video --
the questions
this video answers, that was one
of the first
questions that I asked the
attorney.
And when I got on the phone, I
made a list
of questions.
The first one I said was, well,
what does
this video show?
What do you think that the video
tells us?
And, really, they said this
video doesn't
tell us all that much.
It obviously just shows you kind
of the emotion
and the chaos that unfolded when
Keith Scott
was killed.
But there really isn't anything
in terms of
whether or not he had a gun in
his hand, whether
or not he was walking toward
police or walking
away from police.
There was really no -- there was
really not
much captured.
The video is very shaky, as your
audience,
I'm sure, has seen.
And the idea is that this video
really doesn't
show a clear picture even really
of Keith
Scott himself.
However, I have been told by the
attorneys
that the dash cam video that
they saw with
the family, that that shows a
lot more than
the video that was released
today.
They say that that video shows
Keith Scott
backing up and that he had his
hands down
at his side.
They said that there was some
sort of object
in his left hand, but they're
not sure what
that object was.
They are saying that he was
right-handed,
and that they are not -- and
that that would
be the hand that he -- so, in
other words,
he would be holding an object in
the hand
that he wouldn't have usually
been using primarily.
But the family is not at all
saying specifically
to me that he didn't have a gun
in his hand.
They are saying that no one has
seen a gun
on him and that they didn't
believe that he
owned a gun.
However, I have been talking to
the attorneys
now for two days, and they're
not telling
me definitely he definitely
didn't have a
gun, the video shows that he
gun.
They're definitely not saying
that
JUDY WOODRUFF: And just quickly,
Yamiche,
reaction in the community to
this?
What are they saying?
What are people saying?
YAMICHE ALCINDOR: People are
saying that this
video illustrates that the
police really need
to release the videos that they
have, the
dash cam video and the body cam
video, need
to give us more information
about what happened.
The people I have talked to so
far say that
the fact they're screaming, you
know, gun
and they're saying put your
hands up, and
the wife is screaming he doesn't
have a gun
and trying to explain to them
that he has
a traumatic brain injury, that
he had just
taken his medication, that
indicates to people
that I have talked to that the
police really
were looking at this and looking
at Keith
Scott as someone who was violent
from the
beginning, and they were not
really taking
into consideration the fact that
this might
have someone who was disabled,
someone whose
wife was standing there really
trying to explain
to them the situation.
So people are very angry at
seeing this video.
But I should say that people
also say this
doesn't prove that he didn't
point a gun at
police.
So they really want all the
other videos to
be released as well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yamiche Alcindor,
reporting
in Charlotte, we thank you.
YAMICHE ALCINDOR: Thanks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's
other news: A
Tulsa, Oklahoma, police officer
accused of
fatally shooting an unarmed
black man turned
herself in early today.
Betty Shelby is charged with
first-degree
manslaughter.
She was released after posting a
$50,000 bond.
Her first court appearance is
next week.
Republican Donald Trump got a
boost today
ahead of the first presidential
debate on
Monday night.
In a reversal, former rival
Texas Senator
Ted Cruz announced that he will
vote for Trump
after all.
Writing on Facebook, Cruz said:
"I promised
to support the Republican
nominee.
And I intend to keep my word."
Meanwhile, Hillary Clinton's
camp called for
increased scrutiny of Trump at
the debate.
A spokeswoman said -- quote --
"His level
of lying is unprecedented in
American politics."
A federal appeals court has
struck down Ohio's
process for purging voters from
the rolls
if they haven't voted in at
least two years.
The court ruled today that the
process removes
people who are in fact still
eligible to vote.
The state's Republican elections
chief defended
the process, saying that Ohio
has used it
for more than 20 years.
Bombs rained down on Syria's
largest city
today in the fiercest aerial
onslaught there
yet.
The heavy air attacks on Aleppo
came as the
Syrian government's military
launched a new
offensive to retake the city
with backing
from Russia.
Rescuers worked to dig out
victims buried
beneath the rubble, but they
came under fire
themselves.
IBRAHIM AL-HAJ, Syria (through
translator):
We weren't able to help them
quickly because
of the shelling that we were
subjected to
as we were pulling them from
under the debris
all night.
I have never in my life seen
such a bombardment.
It is very, very intense.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The assault on
Aleppo appeared
to shred any remaining hope of
reviving last
week's cease-fire.
Still, U.S. Secretary of State
John Kerry
says that he and his Russian
counterpart made
-- quote -- "a little bit of
progress" in
talks today.
Back in this country, a veto
showdown now
looms over an act of Congress
permitting families
of 9/11 victims to sue Saudi
Arabia, the home
of most of the hijackers.
President Obama rejected the
bill today, saying
that it could boomerang against
U.S. troops
and diplomats abroad.
Even so, the House and Senate
may have the
votes to override the veto.
And on Wall Street, stocks
slumped after a
new drop in oil prices.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost 131
points to close at 18261.
The Nasdaq fell 33, and the S&P
500 slid 12.
For the week, all three indexes
gained about
1 percent.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
how President
Hillary Clinton would govern on
day one; inside
the last meeting of Colombia's
largest rebel
group ahead of a deal to end 50
years of war;
Mark Shields and David Brooks'
take on the
week's news; and much more.
This week, we're taking a close
look at how
the presidential candidates
might actually
govern.
Last night, the focus was on
what Donald Trump's
early days in office could look
like.
Tonight, we turn to Hillary
Clinton and what
her campaign statements tell us
about a Clinton-led
White House.
John Yang takes it from there.
JOHN YANG: Hillary Clinton's
opponents have
said that her presidency will be
extension
of the Obama agenda.
But what would the early days of
a Hillary
Clinton White House look like?
What might she propose and what
could she
actually get done?
For this, we turn to my
colleague Lisa Desjardins.
And Amie Parnes, who's in New
York.
She's the co-author of "HRC" and
senior White
House correspondent for The
Hill.
Welcome to you both.
Amie, let me start with you.
You literally wrote the book on
Hillary Clinton.
What do you think her priorities
will be in
the first days in the White
House?
AMIE PARNES, The Hill: Well,
she's mentioned
as much on the campaign trail
repeatedly.
She said that she wants to push
a major infrastructure
bill to fix roads and bridges
and highways
across the country.
She also wants to do a whole
immigration overhaul.
And that's something that she
says is at the
top, the very top of her list.
She also wants to get done
campaign finance
reform, and I think, also, she's
going to
have to deal with the Supreme
Court and whether
or not she picks up Obama's
appointee and
takes that forward.
And that is going to be
interesting to see
in this political climate.
JOHN YANG: And, Amie, based on
your reporting
on Hillary Clinton, based on her
time in the
Senate, do you think she's going
to take a
bipartisan approach, try to be
more bipartisan
than we have seen in the past?
AMIE PARNES: I definitely think
so.
When you talk to people who have
worked with
both Clintons, they're very much
into working
across the aisle, to extending
an arm.
I have spoken to Trent Lott
about this.
When he was majority leader, he
worked with
Majority Leader Daschle and with
Bill Clinton.
He feels very confident, he has
said in the
past, that Secretary Clinton
will work in
the same way.
She has a pretty good track
record of working
across the aisle with
Republicans.
She worked with Tom DeLay and
other Republicans,
so I think this is very much her
approach.
I think she's very much a
centrist and I think
this is what she's really
looking to do when
she takes the office.
JOHN YANG: Lisa, one of the many
things you
watch here at the "NewsHour" is
the other
end of Pennsylvania Avenue.
Is that outreach or
bipartisanship going to
be replied to or answered, do
you think?
LISA DESJARDINS: It remains to
be seen.
In her corner, Hillary Clinton
has two big
factors in Congress.
She has a growing women's caucus
that she's
worked with for a long time,
right now, 20
female senators.
It could be 19 or 20, depending
on what happens
this election, very likely 20.
But she also has something even
better.
She has a commanding general
coming into his
own, Chuck Schumer.
And notice, in the past few
years, year-and-a-half,
we haven't seen him on our air
very much.
That's because he's becoming
more bipartisan
himself.
He's been reaching across the
aisle in preparation,
I think, for becoming the new
Democratic leader.
So, he's trying to build that
groundwork for
her.
She has got that.
She also, however, John, has
some conservative
Democratic senators who are not
going to agree
with her on everything.
JOHN YANG: And talk more about
the women senators.
It's a very tight group, as you
know, and
includes Republicans.
Could that help her reach across
the aisle?
LISA DESJARDINS: I'm sure she's
hoping so.
It is an interesting group,
because they eat
dinner together, they support
each other,
they want to grow their ranks
across the aisle.
But some of them are in very
risky Senate
seats and they can only go so
far.
If Hillary Clinton is perceived
as unpopular
as she becomes president, some
of these female
senators are not going to take a
big risk
for her.
They're not going to support
maybe tax cuts
-- or tax increases for the
wealthy.
They may support some things
that are more
across-the-board popular, like a
change in
child care or perhaps a smaller
infrastructure
plan than the one Hillary
Clinton is proposing
now.
JOHN YANG: Amie, you mentioned
the Supreme
Court vacancy.
That could be an issue that
she's got to deal
with starting essentially on day
one.
What do you think that will tell
us about
the rest of her -- about her
approach to Congress,
about her attitude toward
Congress?
AMIE PARNES: It will tell us a
lot, and she's
going to have quite a little
debacle, because
she's going to face some stress
and some pressure
from the left.
They're going to want her to not
go with someone
like Merrick Garland and pick
someone who
is a little more of their liking
and of their
ilk.
And then she's going to face --
it basically
shows what she's going to do
with Republicans,
if she kind of, you know, walks
toward them
a little bit and offers someone
who's more
centrist.
I think it's very much -- you
can kind of
read the tea leaves there and
see how she's
going to govern.
JOHN YANG: And, Lisa, do you
think the leaders
on the Hill, the Republican
leaders on the
Hill, are going to take that as
an indication
as well?
LISA DESJARDINS: Absolutely.
It will be one of the first big
signs of how
she's going to work with them or
not.
And it's even more important
than just sort
of predicting what the next few
years are
going to be.
That Supreme Court choice may
determine what
she can do on immigration, not
just any comprehensive
reform that may or may not go
through Congress,
but can she issue executive
orders, can she
keep President Obama's executive
orders?
That Supreme Court choice will
determine all
of that.
JOHN YANG: Amie, are there
things that she
might try to do by executive
action, rather
than going to Congress first?
AMIE PARNES: I think there are
quite a few.
I think she's going to try to
take Obama's
executive actions a little
further on immigration,
I think maybe on climate.
She has basically tiptoed and
hinted as much
about this.
And she's been asked about this.
I think a lot of Republicans
kind of feel
threatened that she's already
talking about
taking executive action.
I think her first step would be
to work with
Congress, and I think that's her
preference,
so I don't think she's going to
move right
away into executive action.
JOHN YANG: And, Lisa, what's her
relations
with, or what do you think the
relations will
be between the Republican
majority leader,
Mitch McConnell, and the
Republican leader
-- we don't know if he will be
majority or
minority -- and the House
speaker, who likely
will remain House speaker, Paul
Ryan?
LISA DESJARDINS: Right.
Both of those men have their own
very complex
dynamics within their caucuses
or conferences.
We know that Hillary Clinton has
worked with
Mitch McConnell in the past.
We understand it's a
relationship of respect,
not a particularly warm
relationship necessarily,
vs. Mitch McConnell who did work
perhaps best
of all with Joe Biden.
That's something she will have
to work on,
but there is a potential there.
Paul Ryan, I think, he is
someone who has
such difficult dynamics in his
own conference.
He has the far right, who
sometimes says they
will just jump ship on him.
He's got moderates.
Those are things that the White
House under
Hillary Clinton is going to have
to be very
tactical about.
They are strategists.
They're going to try to use that
to their
advantage, but it's difficult
for them, because
sometimes Paul Ryan cannot make
the decisions
himself for his conference.
JOHN YANG: Amie, we have less
than 30 seconds
left, but how do you think a
President Hillary
Clinton would make use of a
President Bill
Clinton?
AMIE PARNES: I think that's a
really interesting
question, and a lot of us want
to know that.
She talked about making him
maybe an economic
adviser, and got a little bit of
pushback
for that.
But I think she is definitely
going to put
him to use.
He is not going to have the
traditional spouse
role.
She will definitely, obviously,
send him to
Capitol Hill, I would think, to
work with
people that he knows.
And she will probably host --
she and he maybe
will host meetings at the White
House for
both Democrats and Republicans.
And I'm sure that's something
that they want
to start right away.
JOHN YANG: Amie Parnes, Lisa
Desjardins, thank
you very much.
AMIE PARNES: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This coming
Monday, in Cartagena,
Colombia, a peace deal will be
signed that
aims to end more than 50 years
of war.
The accord also will mark the
end of the insurgency
by the revolutionary armed
forces of Colombia,
known as the FARC.
Hari Sreenivasan has more.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All this week,
the guerrilla
group has been meeting at a
desolate location
in Southern Colombia.
Today, unanimously, the FARC
voted to approve
the deal and form a new
political party.
After the signing this coming
Monday, the
accord must survive one more
hurdle, a nationwide
popular referendum next weekend.
Special correspondent Nadja
Drost has been
at this meeting all week, and
joins me now.
Nadja, we usually don't talk
about political
conventions in other countries.
And the images that I have seen
from here
have sound stages, fog machines.
It seems almost like a musical
festival.
Give us a sense of what it was
like there.
NADJA DROST: Well, to give you a
sense of
where we are, we are in the
middle of the
Colombian plains, essentially
the middle of
nowhere, and we're surrounded by
miles and
miles of shrubland.
It might strike one as a strange
place to
hold an enormous conference, but
this is a
FARC stronghold and it has
significant historical
meaning for the rebel group.
The conference that the FARC has
been holding
here this week is historic.
It is their final conference as
an armed group.
Here, they have made the
decision to terminate
their armed existence and they
have been plotting
their strategy to transform to a
political
party.
As you mentioned, there are
sound stages,
concerts.
There are also guerrilla camps.
They're really going all out.
It looks like the FARC are using
this as an
opportunity to introduce a new
face to the
Colombian and international
public.
With over 300 journalists here
camped out
in the middle of nowhere, it's a
chance for
the FARC to change the image of
them as a
narco-terrorist group to a group
of rebels
who very much want peace and
want to transform
themselves to become political
actors.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right, so
what's the
next step here?
How do they move forward to
disarm?
NADJA DROST: If the peace
accords do receive
approval from the Colombian
public, then FARC
troops, thousands of them, will
start mobilizing
themselves into large areas that
are being
called zones of concentration,
where they
will stay put for six months as
they start
a gradual process of
disarmament.
But FARC leaders here this week
said that
they need assurance that an
amnesty law will
be passed before their troops
can move anywhere.
They are demanding that they
have legal protections
to ensure their troops are not
going to get
arrested as they move on that.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What are the
indications
in how that referendum vote will
go?
NADJA DROST: It is leaning more
towards the
side of accepting the peace
deal.
However, there is a very strong
campaign,
being led mostly by former
President Alvaro
Uribe, in rejection of the peace
deal.
However, both sides of the
negotiation, both
the FARC and the government,
have made very
clear that, if the no side wins,
if the public
rejects this peace deal, there
is no way that
they are going back to the
negotiating table.
One of the FARC head
negotiators, Carlos Antonio
Lozada, told reporters that
there is not even
the remotest possibility.
And on the government side, it's
expected
that in the case that this
referendum fails
the peace process, then we will
likely not
see another negotiation for at
least 10 years.
So both the FARC and the
government are sending
a very strong message to the
public that this
is Colombia's best, if not
possibly last chance
for peace.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Nadja, you have
covered the FARC for a long
time.
How did we get to this point?
NADJA DROST: There have been
many attempts
in the past decades to end this
conflict,
both through negotiation or
through military
means.
Essentially, both sides have
become very tired
of war.
Colombia has lived now in 52
years of war.
The FARC has suffered year after
year of military
blows.
Their ranks have been shrinking.
And despite very strong military
campaigns,
the Colombian government has not
defeated
them entirely.
So, I think that it became clear
to both sides
that this war was going to be
intractable
unless a negotiation took place.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
special correspondent
Nadja Drost joining us from
Colombia tonight,
thanks so much.
NADJA DROST: Thank you so much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to the
analysis of Shields
and Brooks.
That's syndicated columnist Mark
Shields and
New York Times columnist David
Brooks.
Welcome, gentlemen.
MARK SHIELDS: Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, we turn to
the lead story
tonight and for the last few
nights, David,
two more shootings in Tulsa and
Charlotte,
North Carolina, by police of
black men.
We're still getting the
information.
We know the Tulsa policewoman
was charged
with manslaughter.
What are we to make of this, the
fact that
these keep happening?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, first of
all, the videos
are just harrowing and have an
effect on,
I think, all of us and an effect
on the national
mood.
It's just this is a man losing
his life.
This is a wife losing her
husband.
These are cops in the middle.
And you can feel the pressure
building on
them as they don't know -- quite
know what
to do.
Beyond that, we don't really
know that much.
I do think these things -- these
particular
situations are always going to
happen.
And it seems to me there are two
issues here,
one, getting justice in the
individual case
or these individual cases and
all the individual
cases, and then, second, which
is to me more
serious and the more political
subject, is,
we do know there is tremendous
racial disparities
in searches, in arrests, in all
sorts of police
activities, maybe not in police
killings.
Harvard Research shows there is
not much racial
disparity there, but just about
in every other
police activity, there are these
huge racial
disparities.
And when we see the protests, at
least the
legitimate parts of the
protests, that's the
problem.
And so some -- I think it's
useful to separate
these individual cases -- and we
don't know
what happened here yet -- from
the larger
problem, which is indisputable.
And finding a solution to that
larger problem
is really the political issue.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
And can we focus on the real
problem, Mark,
when we have these -- when
feelings run high,
emotions run high,
understandably?
MARK SHIELDS: Yes, I'm not sure.
I don't think really we have so
far, certainly.
I mean, there's -- I agree with
David.
This is so incredible -- it's
wrenching and
it's sobering.
And my own perspective on it has
changed since
Senator Tim Scott, the
African-American Republican
from South Carolina, took to the
Senate floor,
a card-carrying conservative, an
authentic
conservative man, ran as such,
got elected
and reelected as such, and said
-- spoke about
his own experience of being
stopped seven
times by police officers for the
principal
offense of, as he put it,
driving a new car
in the wrong neighborhood, or
even being stopped
by Capitol Police and demanded
to show his
I.D.
It does give you an idea that
this is a real
problem understanding fully the
pressures
that David talked about and the
risks that
police officers do take.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
Dramatic cell phone
video taken by the wife of the
victim in this
week's deadly encounter with
Charlotte police
raises even more questions.
And it's Friday. Mark Shields
and David Brooks
take on this week in politics,
as we also
examine a Hillary Clinton
presidency in the
second part of our series on how
the candidates
would actually govern.
Then: Two years after the death
of Michael
Brown at the hands of police in
Ferguson,
Missouri, the community turns to
a classic
Greek tragedy for a way to
address ongoing
issues.
BRYAN DOERRIES, Co-Founder,
Outside the Wire:
The central question of this
play, "Antigone,"
is, what happens when everyone's
right or
feels justified in what they're
doing?
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: For the first
time, the public
is getting a look at the police
shooting that
rocked Charlotte, North
Carolina. Keith Scott
was killed Monday, and it turns
out his wife
recorded his last moments.
Be advised: The video may be
disturbing to
some.
RAKEYIA SCOTT, Wife of Keith
Lamont Scott:
Don't shoot him. Don't shoot
him. He has no
weapon.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The voice of
Rakeyia Scott,
pleading with Charlotte police,
telling them
her husband is unarmed and has a
brain injury,
as the confrontation quickly
escalates.
MAN: Drop the gun! Drop the gun!
RAKEYIA SCOTT: He doesn't have a
gun. He has
a TBI.
MAN: Drop the gun.
RAKEYIA SCOTT: He is not going
to do anything
to you guys.
He just took his medicine.
Keith, don't let them break the
windows. Come
on out the car.
MAN: Drop the gun!
RAKEYIA SCOTT: Keith, don't do
it.
MAN: Drop the gun!
RAKEYIA SCOTT: Get out the car.
Keith! Keith!
Don't you do it! Don't you do
it! Keith!
MAN: Drop the gun.
RAKEYIA SCOTT: Keith! Keith!
Keith! Don't
you do it!
(GUNSHOTS)
RAKEYIA SCOTT: Did you shoot
him? Did you
shoot him? Did you shoot him?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Keith Scott is
now lying on
the ground, as his wife screams.
RAKEYIA SCOTT: Did you shoot
him? He better
not be (EXPLETIVE DELETED) dead.
He better
PROTESTERS: Release the video!
Release the
video!
JUDY WOODRUFF: All of this as
city officials
face mounting pressure to
release police body
camera and dash cam video.
KERR PUTNEY,
Charlotte-Mecklenburg, North
Carolina, Police Chief: One
piece of evidence
will never, ever make a good
case. I know
the expectation that video
footage can be
the panacea, and I can tell you
that is not
quite the case.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The city's mayor
said today
the police video should be
released, but only
when it won't jeopardize the
investigation.
Scott's family has now seen the
police footage,
and is calling for its public
release. And
protesters kept up that call
last night.
MAN: If you want people to not
come out here,
and protest, and not to be
suspicious or second-guess
what's going on with the
politicians and the
police, you need to have
transparency. People
need to -- people need to know
the truth.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thursday's
demonstrations were
largely peaceful, as the city
imposed a midnight
curfew, and National Guard
troops helped patrol
the streets.
Meanwhile, police say they
arrested a suspect
in the fatal shooting of a
protester, Justin
Carr, on Wednesday night. They
gave no other
details.
For more on that new video and
the ongoing
investigation, we turn to
Yamiche Alcindor,
who is covering the events in
Charlotte for
The New York Times. I spoke to
her a short
time ago.
Yamiche Alcindor, thank you very
much for
talking with us.
We just showed that video. You
were one of
the reporters the family gave
this to. Where
was Mr. Scott's wife when she
took this?
YAMICHE ALCINDOR, The New York
Times: Mr.
Scott's wife was nearby his car.
She was in
the complex where they lived
together. They
have been married about 20
years.
But she, from my understanding,
what the lawyers
told me, she had seen her
husband sitting
in the car. He flashed his cell
phone at her
indicating that he wanted --
that he his phone
was dying and that he wanted a
charger. She
then went inside to go get that
cell phone
charger. She was inside only for
a couple
of minutes, and then she came
out.
And when she came out, she saw
the scene unfolding
and, as the scene was unfolding,
she started
to record her video, to record
the video on
her phone.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it is very
difficult to
watch, as we just showed our
audience.
What's been the reaction? Has
there been any
official reaction since this has
been out?
YAMICHE ALCINDOR: From my
understanding, we
have asked for several hours now
for a reaction
from the city, and we have not,
as of this
hour, gotten any reaction from
the city about
this video.
I should say the police chief
has said that
the dash cam video, which is a
different video
than the video that was released
today, but
that that video doesn't really
answer all
the questions and it's not
definitive what
happened.
So, they have at least talked a
little bit
about what the video, all the
videos that
captured the shooting show. So,
in that regard,
they have done that. But they
have not at
all responded specifically to
the video released
today by the family of Keith
Scott.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What questions,
Yamiche, does
this video answer? I know there
are some blurry
objects on the ground near where
Mr. Scott's
body is lying. Is there any
consensus on whether
there was a gun?
YAMICHE ALCINDOR: The family has
said -- has
told us through their attorneys
that Mr. Scott
didn't own a gun. I was told by
the attorneys
today that the wife often
cleaned that vehicle
and that there was not a -- she
never saw
a gun and that he didn't own a
gun.
However, the police, of course,
have been
very clear. They say that he did
have a gun,
that they had found a gun --
that they had
found a gun on him after the
shooting. They're
not exactly sure where that gun
was found.
However, they are saying that
there was a
gun on the scene.
In terms of what this video --
the questions
this video answers, that was one
of the first
questions that I asked the
attorney. And when
I got on the phone, I made a
list of questions.
The first one I said was, well,
what does
this video show? What do you
think that the
video tells us?
And, really, they said this
video doesn't
tell us all that much. It
obviously just shows
you kind of the emotion and the
chaos that
unfolded when Keith Scott was
killed. But
there really isn't anything in
terms of whether
or not he had a gun in his hand,
whether or
not he was walking toward police
or walking
away from police. There was
really no -- there
was really not much captured.
The video is very shaky, as your
audience,
I'm sure, has seen. And the idea
is that this
video really doesn't show a
clear picture
even really of Keith Scott
himself. However,
I have been told by the
attorneys that the
dash cam video that they saw
with the family,
that that shows a lot more than
the video
that was released today.
They say that that video shows
Keith Scott
backing up and that he had his
hands down
at his side. They said that
there was some
sort of object in his left hand,
but they're
not sure what that object was.
They are saying
that he was right-handed, and
that they are
not -- and that that would be
the hand that
he -- so, in other words, he
would be holding
an object in the hand that he
wouldn't have
usually been using primarily.
But the family is not at all
saying specifically
to me that he didn't have a gun
in his hand.
They are saying that no one has
seen a gun
on him and that they didn't
believe that he
owned a gun.
However, I have been talking to
the attorneys
now for two days, and they're
not telling
me definitely he definitely
didn't have a
gun, the video shows that he
gun. They're definitely not
saying that
JUDY WOODRUFF: And just quickly,
Yamiche,
reaction in the community to
this? What are
they saying? What are people
saying?
YAMICHE ALCINDOR: People are
saying that this
video illustrates that the
police really need
to release the videos that they
have, the
dash cam video and the body cam
video, need
to give us more information
about what happened.
The people I have talked to so
far say that
the fact they're screaming, you
know, gun
and they're saying put your
hands up, and
the wife is screaming he doesn't
have a gun
and trying to explain to them
that he has
a traumatic brain injury, that
he had just
taken his medication, that
indicates to people
that I have talked to that the
police really
were looking at this and looking
at Keith
Scott as someone who was violent
from the
beginning, and they were not
really taking
into consideration the fact that
this might
have someone who was disabled,
someone whose
wife was standing there really
trying to explain
to them the situation.
So people are very angry at
seeing this video.
But I should say that people
also say this
doesn't prove that he didn't
point a gun at
police. So they really want all
the other
videos to be released as well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yamiche Alcindor,
reporting
in Charlotte, we thank you.
YAMICHE ALCINDOR: Thanks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's
other news: A
Tulsa, Oklahoma, police officer
accused of
fatally shooting an unarmed
black man turned
herself in early today.
Betty Shelby is charged with
first-degree
manslaughter. She was released
after posting
a $50,000 bond. Her first court
appearance
is next week.
Republican Donald Trump got a
boost today
ahead of the first presidential
debate on
Monday night. In a reversal,
former rival
Texas Senator Ted Cruz announced
that he will
vote for Trump after all.
Writing on Facebook,
Cruz said: "I promised to
support the Republican
nominee. And I intend to keep my
word."
Meanwhile, Hillary Clinton's
camp called for
increased scrutiny of Trump at
the debate.
A spokeswoman said -- quote --
"His level
of lying is unprecedented in
American politics."
A federal appeals court has
struck down Ohio's
process for purging voters from
the rolls
if they haven't voted in at
least two years.
The court ruled today that the
process removes
people who are in fact still
eligible to vote.
The state's Republican elections
chief defended
the process, saying that Ohio
has used it
for more than 20 years.
Bombs rained down on Syria's
largest city
today in the fiercest aerial
onslaught there
yet. The heavy air attacks on
Aleppo came
as the Syrian government's
military launched
a new offensive to retake the
city with backing
from Russia. Rescuers worked to
dig out victims
buried beneath the rubble, but
they came under
fire themselves.
IBRAHIM AL-HAJ, Syria (through
translator):
We weren't able to help them
quickly because
of the shelling that we were
subjected to
as we were pulling them from
under the debris
all night. I have never in my
life seen such
a bombardment. It is very, very
intense.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The assault on
Aleppo appeared
to shred any remaining hope of
reviving last
week's cease-fire. Still, U.S.
Secretary of
State John Kerry says that he
and his Russian
counterpart made -- quote -- "a
little bit
of progress" in talks today.
Back in this country, a veto
showdown now
looms over an act of Congress
permitting families
of 9/11 victims to sue Saudi
Arabia, the home
of most of the hijackers.
President Obama
rejected the bill today, saying
that it could
boomerang against U.S. troops
and diplomats
abroad. Even so, the House and
Senate may
have the votes to override the
veto.
And on Wall Street, stocks
slumped after a
new drop in oil prices. The Dow
Jones industrial
average lost 131 points to close
at 18261.
The Nasdaq fell 33, and the S&P
500 slid 12.
For the week, all three indexes
gained about
1 percent.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
how President
Hillary Clinton would govern on
day one; inside
the last meeting of Colombia's
largest rebel
group ahead of a deal to end 50
years of war;
Mark Shields and David Brooks'
take on the
week's news; and much more.
This week, we're taking a close
look at how
the presidential candidates
might actually
govern.
Last night, the focus was on
what Donald Trump's
early days in office could look
like.
Tonight, we turn to Hillary
Clinton and what
her campaign statements tell us
about a Clinton-led
White House.
John Yang takes it from there.
JOHN YANG: Hillary Clinton's
opponents have
said that her presidency will be
extension
of the Obama agenda. But what
would the early
days of a Hillary Clinton White
House look
like? What might she propose and
what could
she actually get done?
For this, we turn to my
colleague Lisa Desjardins.
And Amie Parnes, who's in New
York. She's
the co-author of "HRC" and
senior White House
correspondent for The Hill.
Welcome to you both.
Amie, let me start with you.
You literally wrote the book on
Hillary Clinton.
What do you think her priorities
will be in
the first days in the White
House?
AMIE PARNES, The Hill: Well,
she's mentioned
as much on the campaign trail
repeatedly.
She said that she wants to push
a major infrastructure
bill to fix roads and bridges
and highways
across the country. She also
wants to do a
whole immigration overhaul. And
that's something
that she says is at the top, the
very top
of her list.
She also wants to get done
campaign finance
reform, and I think, also, she's
going to
have to deal with the Supreme
Court and whether
or not she picks up Obama's
appointee and
takes that forward. And that is
going to be
interesting to see in this
political climate.
JOHN YANG: And, Amie, based on
your reporting
on Hillary Clinton, based on her
time in the
Senate, do you think she's going
to take a
bipartisan approach, try to be
more bipartisan
than we have seen in the past?
AMIE PARNES: I definitely think
so.
When you talk to people who have
worked with
both Clintons, they're very much
into working
across the aisle, to extending
an arm. I have
spoken to Trent Lott about this.
When he was
majority leader, he worked with
Majority Leader
Daschle and with Bill Clinton.
He feels very
confident, he has said in the
past, that Secretary
Clinton will work in the same
way.
She has a pretty good track
record of working
across the aisle with
Republicans. She worked
with Tom DeLay and other
Republicans, so I
think this is very much her
approach. I think
she's very much a centrist and I
think this
is what she's really looking to
do when she
takes the office.
JOHN YANG: Lisa, one of the many
things you
watch here at the "NewsHour" is
the other
end of Pennsylvania Avenue.
Is that outreach or
bipartisanship going to
be replied to or answered, do
you think?
LISA DESJARDINS: It remains to
be seen.
In her corner, Hillary Clinton
has two big
factors in Congress. She has a
growing women's
caucus that she's worked with
for a long time,
right now, 20 female senators.
It could be
19 or 20, depending on what
happens this election,
very likely 20.
But she also has something even
better. She
has a commanding general coming
into his own,
Chuck Schumer. And notice, in
the past few
years, year-and-a-half, we
haven't seen him
on our air very much. That's
because he's
becoming more bipartisan
himself. He's been
reaching across the aisle in
preparation,
I think, for becoming the new
Democratic leader.
So, he's trying to build that
groundwork for
her. She has got that. She also,
however,
John, has some conservative
Democratic senators
who are not going to agree with
her on everything.
JOHN YANG: And talk more about
the women senators.
It's a very tight group, as you
know, and
includes Republicans. Could that
help her
reach across the aisle?
LISA DESJARDINS: I'm sure she's
hoping so.
It is an interesting group,
because they eat
dinner together, they support
each other,
they want to grow their ranks
across the aisle.
But some of them are in very
risky Senate
seats and they can only go so
far. If Hillary
Clinton is perceived as
unpopular as she becomes
president, some of these female
senators are
not going to take a big risk for
her. They're
not going to support maybe tax
cuts -- or
tax increases for the wealthy.
They may support some things
that are more
across-the-board popular, like a
change in
child care or perhaps a smaller
infrastructure
plan than the one Hillary
Clinton is proposing
now.
JOHN YANG: Amie, you mentioned
the Supreme
Court vacancy. That could be an
issue that
she's got to deal with starting
essentially
on day one. What do you think
that will tell
us about the rest of her --
about her approach
to Congress, about her attitude
toward Congress?
AMIE PARNES: It will tell us a
lot, and she's
going to have quite a little
debacle, because
she's going to face some stress
and some pressure
from the left.
They're going to want her to not
go with someone
like Merrick Garland and pick
someone who
is a little more of their liking
and of their
ilk. And then she's going to
face -- it basically
shows what she's going to do
with Republicans,
if she kind of, you know, walks
toward them
a little bit and offers someone
who's more
centrist.
I think it's very much -- you
can kind of
read the tea leaves there and
see how she's
going to govern.
JOHN YANG: And, Lisa, do you
think the leaders
on the Hill, the Republican
leaders on the
Hill, are going to take that as
an indication
as well?
LISA DESJARDINS: Absolutely. It
will be one
of the first big signs of how
she's going
to work with them or not.
And it's even more important
than just sort
of predicting what the next few
years are
going to be. That Supreme Court
choice may
determine what she can do on
immigration,
not just any comprehensive
reform that may
or may not go through Congress,
but can she
issue executive orders, can she
keep President
Obama's executive orders?
That Supreme Court choice will
determine all
of that.
JOHN YANG: Amie, are there
things that she
might try to do by executive
action, rather
than going to Congress first?
AMIE PARNES: I think there are
quite a few.
I think she's going to try to
take Obama's
executive actions a little
further on immigration,
I think maybe on climate. She
has basically
tiptoed and hinted as much about
this. And
she's been asked about this. I
think a lot
of Republicans kind of feel
threatened that
she's already talking about
taking executive
action.
I think her first step would be
to work with
Congress, and I think that's her
preference,
so I don't think she's going to
move right
away into executive action.
JOHN YANG: And, Lisa, what's her
relations
with, or what do you think the
relations will
be between the Republican
majority leader,
Mitch McConnell, and the
Republican leader
-- we don't know if he will be
majority or
minority -- and the House
speaker, who likely
will remain House speaker, Paul
Ryan?
LISA DESJARDINS: Right.
Both of those men have their own
very complex
dynamics within their caucuses
or conferences.
We know that Hillary Clinton has
worked with
Mitch McConnell in the past.
We understand it's a
relationship of respect,
not a particularly warm
relationship necessarily,
vs. Mitch McConnell who did work
perhaps best
of all with Joe Biden. That's
something she
will have to work on, but there
is a potential
there.
Paul Ryan, I think, he is
someone who has
such difficult dynamics in his
own conference.
He has the far right, who
sometimes says they
will just jump ship on him. He's
got moderates.
Those are things that the White
House under
Hillary Clinton is going to have
to be very
tactical about.
They are strategists. They're
going to try
to use that to their advantage,
but it's difficult
for them, because sometimes Paul
Ryan cannot
make the decisions himself for
his conference.
JOHN YANG: Amie, we have less
than 30 seconds
left, but how do you think a
President Hillary
Clinton would make use of a
President Bill
Clinton?
AMIE PARNES: I think that's a
really interesting
question, and a lot of us want
to know that.
She talked about making him
maybe an economic
adviser, and got a little bit of
pushback
for that. But I think she is
definitely going
to put him to use. He is not
going to have
the traditional spouse role. She
will definitely,
obviously, send him to Capitol
Hill, I would
think, to work with people that
he knows.
And she will probably host --
she and he maybe
will host meetings at the White
House for
both Democrats and Republicans.
And I'm sure
that's something that they want
to start right
away.
JOHN YANG: Amie Parnes, Lisa
Desjardins, thank
you very much.
AMIE PARNES: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This coming
Monday, in Cartagena,
Colombia, a peace deal will be
signed that
aims to end more than 50 years
of war. The
accord also will mark the end of
the insurgency
by the revolutionary armed
forces of Colombia,
known as the FARC.
Hari Sreenivasan has more.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All this week,
the guerrilla
group has been meeting at a
desolate location
in Southern Colombia. Today,
unanimously,
the FARC voted to approve the
deal and form
a new political party.
After the signing this coming
Monday, the
accord must survive one more
hurdle, a nationwide
popular referendum next weekend.
Special correspondent Nadja
Drost has been
at this meeting all week, and
joins me now.
Nadja, we usually don't talk
about political
conventions in other countries.
And the images
that I have seen from here have
sound stages,
fog machines. It seems almost
like a musical
festival. Give us a sense of
what it was like
there.
NADJA DROST: Well, to give you a
sense of
where we are, we are in the
middle of the
Colombian plains, essentially
the middle of
nowhere, and we're surrounded by
miles and
miles of shrubland.
It might strike one as a strange
place to
hold an enormous conference, but
this is a
FARC stronghold and it has
significant historical
meaning for the rebel group.
The conference that the FARC has
been holding
here this week is historic. It
is their final
conference as an armed group.
Here, they have
made the decision to terminate
their armed
existence and they have been
plotting their
strategy to transform to a
political party.
As you mentioned, there are
sound stages,
concerts. There are also
guerrilla camps.
They're really going all out. It
looks like
the FARC are using this as an
opportunity
to introduce a new face to the
Colombian and
international public. With over
300 journalists
here camped out in the middle of
nowhere,
it's a chance for the FARC to
change the image
of them as a narco-terrorist
group to a group
of rebels who very much want
peace and want
to transform themselves to
become political
actors.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right, so
what's the
next step here? How do they move
forward to
disarm?
NADJA DROST: If the peace
accords do receive
approval from the Colombian
public, then FARC
troops, thousands of them, will
start mobilizing
themselves into large areas that
are being
called zones of concentration,
where they
will stay put for six months as
they start
a gradual process of
disarmament.
But FARC leaders here this week
said that
they need assurance that an
amnesty law will
be passed before their troops
can move anywhere.
They are demanding that they
have legal protections
to ensure their troops are not
going to get
arrested as they move on that.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What are the
indications
in how that referendum vote will
go?
NADJA DROST: It is leaning more
towards the
side of accepting the peace
deal. However,
there is a very strong campaign,
being led
mostly by former President
Alvaro Uribe, in
rejection of the peace deal.
However, both sides of the
negotiation, both
the FARC and the government,
have made very
clear that, if the no side wins,
if the public
rejects this peace deal, there
is no way that
they are going back to the
negotiating table.
One of the FARC head
negotiators, Carlos Antonio
Lozada, told reporters that
there is not even
the remotest possibility. And on
the government
side, it's expected that in the
case that
this referendum fails the peace
process, then
we will likely not see another
negotiation
for at least 10 years.
So both the FARC and the
government are sending
a very strong message to the
public that this
is Colombia's best, if not
possibly last chance
for peace.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Nadja, you have
covered the FARC for a long
time. How did
we get to this point?
NADJA DROST: There have been
many attempts
in the past decades to end this
conflict,
both through negotiation or
through military
means.
Essentially, both sides have
become very tired
of war. Colombia has lived now
in 52 years
of war. The FARC has suffered
year after year
of military blows. Their ranks
have been shrinking.
And despite very strong military
campaigns,
the Colombian government has not
defeated
them entirely.
So, I think that it became clear
to both sides
that this war was going to be
intractable
unless a negotiation took place.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
special correspondent
Nadja Drost joining us from
Colombia tonight,
thanks so much.
NADJA DROST: Thank you so much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to the
analysis of Shields
and Brooks. That's syndicated
columnist Mark
Shields and New York Times
columnist David
Brooks.
Welcome, gentlemen.
MARK SHIELDS: Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, we turn to
the lead story
tonight and for the last few
nights, David,
two more shootings in Tulsa and
Charlotte,
North Carolina, by police of
black men. We're
still getting the information.
We know the
Tulsa policewoman was charged
with manslaughter.
What are we to make of this, the
fact that
these keep happening?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, first of
all, the videos
are just harrowing and have an
effect on,
I think, all of us and an effect
on the national
mood.
It's just this is a man losing
his life. This
is a wife losing her husband.
These are cops
in the middle. And you can feel
the pressure
building on them as they don't
know -- quite
know what to do. Beyond that, we
don't really
know that much.
I do think these things -- these
particular
situations are always going to
happen. And
it seems to me there are two
issues here,
one, getting justice in the
individual case
or these individual cases and
all the individual
cases, and then, second, which
is to me more
serious and the more political
subject, is,
we do know there is tremendous
racial disparities
in searches, in arrests, in all
sorts of police
activities, maybe not in police
killings.
Harvard Research shows there is
not much racial
disparity there, but just about
in every other
police activity, there are these
huge racial
disparities. And when we see the
protests,
at least the legitimate parts of
the protests,
that's the problem.
And so some -- I think it's
useful to separate
these individual cases -- and we
don't know
what happened here yet -- from
the larger
problem, which is indisputable.
And finding
a solution to that larger
problem is really
the political issue.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
And can we focus on the real
problem, Mark,
when we have these -- when
feelings run high,
emotions run high,
understandably?
MARK SHIELDS: Yes, I'm not sure.
I don't think
really we have so far,
certainly. I mean,
there's -- I agree with David.
This is so
incredible -- it's wrenching and
it's sobering.
And my own perspective on it has
changed since
Senator Tim Scott, the
African-American Republican
from South Carolina, took to the
Senate floor,
a card-carrying conservative, an
authentic
conservative man, ran as such,
got elected
and reelected as such, and said
-- spoke about
his own experience of being
stopped seven
times by police officers for the
principal
offense of, as he put it,
driving a new car
in the wrong neighborhood, or
even being stopped
by Capitol Police and demanded
to show his
I.D.
It does give you an idea that
this is a real
problem understanding fully the
pressures
that David talked about and the
risks that
police officers do take.
But I guess, when I look at
this, Judy, most
of, I mean, I -- I just think
about where
we are as a country. And I'm not
sure at this
moment.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, that's
pretty -- I don't
know what one says to that.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
I mean, I think, you know, as we
go around
the country -- I was in
Nashville last night.
I met with some cops. I was in
Chicago last
week. And you find that a couple
things happen.
You find a lot of police forces
that are actually
doing better, I think, at
community policing,
getting integrated with the
communities. San
Antonio, Texas, does a fine job.
And then -- but then, in say,
the Chicago
case, there does seem to be some
evidence
of a Ferguson effect, of the
cops being -- not
wanting to be on those videos,
and then pulling
back. And then you get the spike
in the murder
rate as a result.
And so these are just super hard
issues. And,
on the one hand, there's clear
bias in the
way African-Americans are
treated. On the
other hand, I used to be a
police reporter.
When cops are out there, even if
they have
a gun in their hands, they do
not feel safe.
They feel like they're scared.
And so these situations are
harrowing on all
sides.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Mark...
MARK SHIELDS: Tulsa does show, I
think, the
value of transparency, which we
are not seeing...
JUDY WOODRUFF: They put the
video out almost
immediately.
MARK SHIELDS: They put it out.
And it was
there in the case of Terence
Crutcher. And
the district attorney moved
quickly, and started
the process of resolution.
North Carolina is -- the only
video we have
seen so far is that of the
widow. So, you
know, there seems to be a lack
of -- or an
absence so far of transparency.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes. It seems to
me the arguments
for not releasing the video seem
weak to me.
And they really should release
it.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we saw --
well, the family
is saying they have seen the
video, and they
are not saying it's definitive,
but they want
it made public.
And, David, Hillary Clinton put
out a statement.
I guest she tweeted that the
video should
be made public. She's going to
Charlotte this
weekend.
What do we know about these
candidates at
a moment? This comes in the
middle of the
election. We're just a couple of
days away
from the debate. She's made some
sympathetic
comments. Donald Trump initially
made a sympathetic
comment about the victim in
Tulsa, but then,
I guess, last night made a
speech and talked
about we need to support the
police.
DAVID BROOKS: Right. Yes.
So, just politically -- and this
is not what
I support, but what I think
realistically
is the effect of this. I think
it helps Donald
Trump. I go back to 1968.
Richard Nixon was
helped by riots, if you want to
put it that
way. And Trump's campaign, from
the convention
speech on, has been really
predicated on the
argument that Americans are
under violent
threat, and that there is chaos
and that our
social order is being undone.
And if there's not just the
shootings, but
the riots and the unrest, I
think, at least
for a certain segment of the
population, that
will undergird and support his
argument, his
perceptions of what America is.
And I do think,
if there's any political effect
of this, that
air of disorder will end up
helping him a
little.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You agree it
helps him?
MARK SHIELDS: I think it's a
pretty established
principle in American politics
that looting
during a campaign helps the
self-identified
law and order candidate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, not all the
protests
involve looting.
MARK SHIELDS: No. No -- but when
there is
looting, is my point.
I think that North Carolina is a
test case
in many respects. North Carolina
had the reputation
among Southern states for being
so progressive
under the governorships of --
particularly
of Terry Sanford and Jim Hunt,
exceptional
national -- state leaders and
national leaders.
And now, since -- in the last
year, since
the legislature and its bathroom
laws and
other effects, it's seen its own
reputation
tarnished. It's lost the
National Basketball
Association all-star game, a
matter of pride
in a basketball state, lost the
Atlantic Coast
Conference tournament, which is
an identifying
icon of North Carolina life.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Then some voting
rights controversies.
MARK SHIELDS: It's lost -- the
voting rights
controversy.
It's lost jobs and business
expansion. But
I think this -- Charlotte had
the self-identified
reputation of being the Atlanta,
the new Atlanta,
too busy to hate, and all the
rest of it.
And I think this is a blow. And
I don't know
how it plays out politically in
the national
election.
I think Secretary Clinton, it's
-- I'm not
sure what the rewards are of
going to Charlotte.
There is a risk if looting
followers, if there
isn't -- there's peace and
tranquility, and
she's seen as a unifying figure,
then that's
a positive.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, David, we
are, we said,
just a couple of days, hours
away from the
first debate.
Let's talk about it. What do we
see, what
do we feel at this moment? There
are expectations.
How different are they for these
two candidates
and what are they?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
First, it's easy to overestimate
the effects
of the debates. We all have 1960
in our head.
But, historically, they produce
maybe a one-
or two-point bump. And so George
Bush lost
a lot of debates. A lot of
losers have won
a lot of debates, and it hasn't
shifted the
election.
I'm very taken with an article
in "The Atlantic
Monthly" by James Fallows, where
says, when
you watch the debate, you should
turn off
the volume.
MARK SHIELDS: What?
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: But when you --
you might lose
us, but -- unless you just want
to look at
our faces.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: But when you think
of pivotal
debate moments, it's often a
visual image.
And that's certainly true with
Donald Trump.
What he does is, he has
exercised dominance
displays throughout the
Republican race. And
it's really his physical nature
that helped
him sort of stare down Jeb Bush
and Marco
Rubio. And a lot of the moments
are -- either
-- Al Gore sighing -- they're
not the words
that come out of their mouth.
They're the
visual posture they display that
people are
evaluating.
And even though they don't
matter as much,
I do think if Trump can seem
normal, he will
have normalized himself a little
maybe for
some voters.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But that's --
you're saying
that's a lower expectation, a
lower bar.
DAVID BROOKS: To seem normal, a
normal human
being, yes, not mentally ill,
yes.
MARK SHIELDS: To return to my
sports metaphor,
I think, like a good basketball
coach, the
Clinton people have worked the
referees this
week. They have made the point
that this is
-- he's not to be held to some
minimal standard,
if he shows up and isn't profane
or obscene
or obnoxious, that this is a
debate for the
presidency, that we're measuring
the qualifications
of these people.
So I think, in that sense, I
think it has
worked. He has been put on
notice.
I think she has a great
advantage going in,
not simply that she has debated
Barack Obama
five times, 90 minutes of Bernie
Sanders five
-- he never has -- he's never
gone one on
one with anybody. He's been able
to choose
his spots, and go in and speak
in wall posters
and bumper sticker slogans.
You can't do that for 90
minutes. You can't
just talk make America great
again, build
a great wall. This is a -- it's
a test of
some substance.
She knows exactly all the
policy. She just
has to not try and prosecute the
case. She
has to try and win and tell
people why she
wants to be president, what
difference it's
going to make in their lives,
two things,
not 23 things, what two
differences they're
going to make, what two
improvements.
So, I really think that she has
an advantage.
He has a great advantage, Judy,
in the sense
that he's enormously comfortable
with the
camera, he's enormously
comfortable on stage.
And Charlie Munger, Warren
Buffett's great
sidekick, had a marvelous
statement. He said
never underestimate a man who
overestimates
himself. And that's -- Donald
Trump meets
that definition completely.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you see --
David, how
do you see expectations for
Hillary Clinton?
What standard does she have to
meet?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, the coolness
standard.
If she loses this election, it
will be for
one reason, because she loses
millennials.
And they're not going to vote
for Trump, but
they could vote for Gary Johnson
and somebody,
Jill Stein. And so she has to
win over millennial.
And this might be one of the few
times she
gets a lot of voters, at least
live or later
online, to actually look at her.
And she has
to somehow resonate with the
people that Bernie
Sanders and Barack Obama touched
so deeply.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How does she do
that?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, some of it
may be college
-- some of it may be just the
vulnerable style.
This is a generation that's
grown up with
-- on social media. And they're
used to a
style of social communication
that's more
casual. And she has not been
that. Her fund-raising
style is like Cher and Barbra
Streisand. It's
not like -- it's really reaching
the young.
Her policy style is very 1960s
Democrat, sort
of traditional.
And she has not, either
stylistically or substantively,
broken in with the current
issues, either
stylistically, or the concerns a
lot of young
people have about TPP and all
that kind of
stuff, about the openness of
trade.
And so, somehow, millennials has
to be her
central focus.
MARK SHIELDS: She's running
against somebody
who's substance-free,
substance-free.
I mean, so I think there is a
certain responsibility
on filling in the empty spaces,
which are
large in the case of the
Republican nominee.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, the two of
you are going
to be with us all night Monday
night starting
at 6:00 on "NewsHour."
MARK SHIELDS: With the sound...
(CROSSTALK)
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: And a little bit
of news here
at the end.
We're told that NBC is reporting
both Hillary
Clinton and Donald Trump will
meet on Sunday
with Israeli Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu,
so a little bit of foreign
policy in the middle
of all this.
We can't wait to see you Monday
night.
MARK SHIELDS: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank you, both,
Mark and David.
It has been, as we have been
discussing, a
difficult week in Charlotte,
where police
and residents have clashed over
the shooting
death of a black man.
It comes in the same week that
an officer
was charged with manslaughter,
as we have
also been discussing, over that
shooting in
Tulsa.
But even amid the protests and
tensions around
the country, an unusual theater
project is
trying to help a community move
forward.
Jeffrey Brown went to Ferguson,
Missouri,
to see the efforts to heal.
ACTOR: Were you aware of my
proclamation forbidding
the body to be buried?
ACTRESS: Yes, I knew it was a
crime.
ACTOR: And you still dared to
break the law?
ACTRESS: I didn't know your laws
were more
powerful than divine laws,
Creon.
JEFFREY BROWN: In ancient
Thebes, a clash
between the state's need for
security and
order and the conscience of an
individual,
as a dead body lies on the
ground unburied.
But we are in modern-day
Missouri, near Ferguson,
where two years ago, 18-year-old
Michael Brown's
body lay in the street for four
hours after
he was shot and killed by a
police officer,
leading to violent clashes and
days of protest
and rioting.
A grand jury cleared officer
Darren Wilson
of criminal wrongdoing. But the
U.S. Justice
Department found a pattern of
racial bias
in a predominantly white police
force in a
predominately black city.
LT. LATRICIA ALLEN, Saint Louis
Metropolitan
Police Department: We talk about
the racial
disparity and all of that. It
was just a populace
waiting to boil over.
JEFFREY BROWN: We drove through
the area where
the shooting and rioting
occurred with Lieutenant
Latricia Allen of the Saint
Louis Metropolitan
Police Department. She was
brought into Ferguson
back then to help calm things
down. Two years
later, she told me, she can make
arguments
for both sides.
LT. LATRICIA ALLEN: My life is
being a law
enforcement person and being a
mother, because
nobody really knows how I feel.
But what I
do know is that a mother
shouldn't have to
bury her child, period.
JEFFREY BROWN: She also says
this of Ferguson
and its aftermath:
LT. LATRICIA ALLEN: It's the big
F-word. It's
something we don't even really
talk about
anymore. It's something that
occurred, and
no one is proud of anything that
happened.
It's not like we're on --
wearing a badge
of honor, police officers one,
the citizens
zero, nothing like that.
JEFFREY BROWN: Now, "Antigone in
Ferguson,"
a theater production, has
brought Lieutenant
Allen back here again, this time
to sing.
Performances at the Wellspring
Church and
Normandy High School, where
Michael Brown
graduated months before his
death, were presented
by a New York-based group called
Outside the
Wire, best known for its
so-called Theater
of War productions aimed at
helping military
personnel deal with PTSD.
BRYAN DOERRIES, Co-Founder,
Outside the Wire:
It's about holding a space,
creating a space
where truth can be told and they
can be heard.
JEFFREY BROWN: Founder Bryan
Doerries has
expanded the subjects he
addresses in his
work, but kept the original
format. Four prominent
actors present a staged reading
of an ancient
Greek tragedy.
ACTOR: No woman will ever tell
me what to
do as long as I live.
JEFFREY BROWN: A group of
experts or, here,
community members
representatives, including
a friend of Michael Brown, and
his former
teacher respond to the issues
raised.
DUANE FOSTER, Drama Teacher: So
many people
look at the actual act of the
shooting. People
forget about the total blatant
disrespect
of that boy laying in the ground
because people
were trying to figure out what
to do.
JEFFREY BROWN: And, most
important, the audience
of community members, people
living amid the
problem being tackled, engage in
a discussion.
WOMAN: We, all over the country,
have the
same problems here as
everywhere. We are at
war with ourselves.
MAN: Where do we go as a society
when we know
what we do is wrong and we
continue to do
it?
JEFFREY BROWN: Sometimes, that
can get heated.
LT. LATRICIA ALLEN: That's the
big elephant
in the room, that we don't want
to talk about
the murder rate. We don't want
black-on-black crime, because
that gives us
a black eye.
MAN: There is no such thing as
black-on-black
crime; 94 percent of all crimes
committed
by black men are -- yes, are
perpetrated by
other black men, but, also -- if
you read
the statistics, it also says
that 84 percent
of murders that are committed on
white people
are committed by white people.
JEFFREY BROWN: All of them
connecting dots
between the ancients and their
experience
and pain.
WOMAN: We collectively are the
Greek chorus,
and we speak for what democracy
is and for
what we want in our world.
JEFFREY BROWN: For Ferguson,
Doerries chose
Sophocles' tragedy "Antigone."
BRYAN DOERRIES: So, the central
question of
this play, "Antigone," is, what
happens when
everyone's right or feels
justified in what
they're doing?
We think about the fact that the
protester
in the street is right for
feeling rage and
betrayal and anger, for being
devastated by
incident after incident after
incident that
we keep hearing about in the
news. And the
police force is right to be
afraid, because
we live in this incredibly
violent world,
in which one only has a few
milliseconds sometimes
to make a decision that could
change the rest
of your life.
And so the play's about stepping
back from
all that and acknowledging that
we're all
human and we're all fallible.
JEFFREY BROWN: Doerries found a
local collaborator
in Phil Woodmore, a choral
teacher at a middle
school who also heads singing
groups for the
Saint Louis Police Department
and for his
church.
PHIL WOODMORE, Choral Teacher: I
feel that
the artistic value of what we're
doing breaks
down a lot of barriers. It
breaks down a lot
of walls, and it breaks down a
lot of things
that put people in boxes, where
they can be
open, they can express
themselves freely,
and they can give maybe
information or share
things, personal stories that
they might not
have shared otherwise.
JEFFREY BROWN: The star power
came from four
actors, Gloria Reuben, Reg E.
Cathey, Samira
Wiley, and Glenn Davis, who'd
flown in from
various television and other
projects specially
for this one day of
performances.
REG E. CATHEY, Actor: Take her
away. She has
said enough. Bury her alive.
JEFFREY BROWN: Cathey, known for
his work
on "House of Cards," is a
veteran performer
of the Theater of War. This
time, he played
Creon, the king and uncle of
Antigone, who,
in trying to preserve the state,
is also tearing
it apart.
REG E. CATHEY: The family
killing each other
struck me really deeply, I guess
because it's
only my sister and I. I have
lost both my
parents.
And that's what we're doing in
America. America,
if we're one family, if we truly
are e pluribus
unum, we're killing each other
in a vile way.
SAMIRA WILEY, Actress: These
people are doing
wrong in the eyes of the gods.
JEFFREY BROWN: Samira Wiley is a
newcomer
to this type of performance. She
played Antigone,
and said her current work on
"Orange Is the
New Black" has a deep connection
to events
in Ferguson after Michael
Brown's death.
SAMIRA WILEY: You are standing
in front of
people. You are looking at
people who were
in this young man's class,
his educators. And what we do,
at the end
of the day, is fake. It's --
we're acting.
But we can elicit real,
emotional, human feelings
from people. And one thing that
Bryan Doerries
tells -- or told me was that
it's not so much
about what we can give them, but
what they
can give us. And you can hear
that in theory,
but I really experienced that
today.
REG E. CATHEY: And that last
song, "I'm Covered,"
which has multiple meanings of,
I'm covered
in the blood of the lamb, which,
of course,
is Jesus. But, sometimes, it
sounded like
they were singing, I'm covered
in the blood
of the land, which strikes you a
whole different
way.
Then you're thinking, oh, there
wasn't a dry
eye in the house, which is the
selfish part
of being an actor, that you love
it. We love
killing the people.
(LAUGHTER)
REG E. CATHEY: But it's even
better when we
all get to take a journey
together. And that
happened this afternoon.
JEFFREY BROWN: That song was
written by Phil
Woodmore and dedicated to Saint
Louis law
enforcement. Through art, a
chance to be heard
and perhaps, move forward. From
Ferguson,
Missouri, I'm Jeffrey Brown for
the "PBS NewsHour."
That song was written by Phil
Woodmore and
dedicated to Saint Louis law
enforcement,
through art, a chance to be
heard and perhaps
move forward.
From Ferguson, Missouri, I'm
Jeffrey Brown
for the "PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to another in
our Brief
But Spectacular episodes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to another in
our Brief
But Spectacular episodes.
Yesterday, President Obama
honored Mel Brooks
with the National Medal of Arts.
Tonight, we celebrate one of his
comedic cohorts,
legendary performer and writer
Carl Reiner,"
whose new book, "Carl Reiner:
Now You're Ninety-Four,"
will be out later this year.
CARL REINER, Actor/Writer: I
wanted to be
an operatic tenor.
My father had these Red Seal
records of Enrico
Caruso. I lacked one thing --
two things,
actually, pitch and timing.
Shall I sing it
for you?
I don't know how the voice is
today, but we
will see. We will find out.
(SINGING)
CARL REINER: Those people who
have a sense
of humor get through life more
comfortably
than those who don't.
My influences in comedy started
because my
parents loved comedy. My parents
always sought
out comedies. The Marx Brothers
were their
favorites and our favorites.
Couldn't wait
for a new Marx Brothers movie.
I was a straight actor. I didn't
think I would
ever be doing that. My brother
saw a thing
in the paper that said free
acting classes,
WPA, 100th and Center Street,
New York.
I met Mrs. Whittington (ph), an
old English
woman, who said: "We're going to
all learn
something from Shakespeare.
We're going to
do a soliloquy from Shakespeare.
We're going
to recite Queen Gertrude's
speech on the death
of Ophelia."
And to this day: "There is a
willow grows
aslant a brook, that shows his
hoar leaves
in the glassy stream. There with
a clambering
to hang, an envious sliver
broke, when down
her weedy trophies and herself
fell in the
weeping brook, pulled the poor
wretch from
her melodious lay to muddy
death."
It's pretty close to that,
anyway. Applause,
applause.
Max Liebman, who was doing a
show called "Your
Show of Shows," and he need a
straight man
for Sid. Sid was maybe the best
comedian that
ever lived.
I auditioned, and I got the job.
There was
a young comic called Mel Brooks.
I didn't
know who he was, but he was
standing up and
delivering a monologue about a
Jewish pirate.
Delighted to be here on "The
Hollywood Palace."
MEL BROOKS, Comedian: Delighted
to be alive,
never mind anything else.
CARL REINER: And said to Mel,
here's a man
who was actually at the scene of
the crucifixion
2,000 years ago. He's not too --
and he said,
oh, boy. I said, you knew Jesus?
He says,
thin lad, right? He wore
sandals, walked around
with 12 other guys? Yes, he
said, they always
came into the store. I had a
candy store.
They never bought anything, but
I gave them
water. They were nice boys.
Steve Allen, he said, fellows,
you got to
record this. He had a recording
studio, World
Pacific Jazz. He said, go there,
wail, do
whatever you want with it.
For about two-and-a-half-hours,
Mel and I
ad-libbed. I cut it down to 47
minutes, and
the 2000-Year-Old Man was born.
We still weren't
sure that it was for everybody,
and that only
Jews would like it.
Cary Grant popped by. And I
said, oh, I have
a record I think you're going to
like. And
I gave him one of the records.
He came back
the following day, and he says,
could I have
a dozen? He says, I'm going to
England. He
came back and he said, she loved
it. I said,
who loved it? He said, the queen
mother.
Went to Buckingham Palace,
played the record.
And I said to Mel, the biggest
(INAUDIBLE)
in the world loved our record
we're in.
When I'm asked what's the best
time I have
had in my life in show business,
hands down,
creating and producing "The Dick
Van Dyke
Show" and writing for it.
If you have one good friend,
you're lucky.
And I have one good friend. I
call him my
best friend. My life is fuller
because I have
had Mel in my life.
If he doesn't come over, I don't
know what
to do with myself. He comes over
every night.
We love movies. And we said any
movie that
has three or four lines in it,
and we hear
those, we know we're in for a
good time. The
lines are, lock all the doors,
secure the
perimeter, and let nobody in and
out, and
get some rest.
He became an entity. And that
entity wrote
some of the best and most
memorable movies
of all times, I mean, to this
day. Farting
is OK because he wrote a movie
called "Blazing
Saddles."
The best thing that ever
happened to me was
meeting a woman named Estelle
Lebost. She
raised three of the greatest
kids ever lived.
And she raised one great
husband, because
she was eight years older than
I, knew everything
about everything.
She informed me about life,
politics. Everything
that I am is because Estelle
Reiner, Estelle
Lebost, made me who I am today.
Sixty-five years with the right
woman, you
can't ask for anything more.
This is Carl Reiner. That was my
Brief But
Spectacular take on this guy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Carl and Mel, we
love you both.
And you can watch additional
Brief But Spectacular
episodes on our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour/Brief.
Gwen Ifill is preparing for
"Washington Week,"
which airs later this evening --
Gwen.
GWEN IFILL: Bombs in New York
and New Jersey,
controversial police shootings
in Oklahoma
and North Carolina. What would
the candidates
do if they were president? And
what will Monday's
debate show us? It's all about
the context,
which we will provide tonight on
"Washington
Week" -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we will be
watching.
And on "PBS NewsHour" Saturday:
gerrymandering.
Who should have the power to
draw congressional
district lines?
And, on Monday, we will be back
with live
coverage of the first general
election debate
of 2016.
But online right now, you can
interact with
all the general election
presidential debates
since 1960.
LLOYD BENTSEN (D), Vice
Presidential Candidate:
Senator, you're no jack Kennedy.
GERALDINE FERRARO (D), Vice
Presidential Candidate:
I almost resent, Vice President
Bush, your
patronizing...
MITT ROMNEY (R), Presidential
Candidate: Binders
full of women.
MICHAEL DUKAKIS (D),
Presidential Candidate:
That I have opposed the death
penalty during
all of my life.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You can find the
interactive
on watchthedebates.org.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
Have a great weekend. Thank you,
and good
night.
Have a great weekend. Thank you,
and good
night.